
.. _new_latest:

.. _new_2026.4.3:

Version 2026.4.3 (released on 3 April 2026)
--------------------------------------------

This release delivers a major backend migration to Rust FFI, RSL physics refinements, a new temperature attribution module, comprehensive STEBBS enhancements, DTS improvements, and extensive validation and CI hardening.

**Major Features:**

- **Rust FFI Bridge**: Replaced f90wrap with a Rust FFI bridge as the sole simulation backend, improving build reliability and cross-platform support. (:pr:`1209`)

- **Rust CLI Installation**: Unified CLI interface with automatic PATH installation for the Rust-based ``suews-run`` command. (:pr:`1215`)

- **T2 Attribution Module**: Added module for diagnosing near-surface temperature, humidity, and wind speed changes by decomposing model output into physical process contributions, with diurnal cycle and heatmap visualisation helpers. (:pr:`918`)

- **Dynamic RSL Coefficients**: Compute momentum and heat transfer coefficients (c2m/c2h) dynamically from Harman and Finnigan (2007, 2008) RSL theory, replacing previous static lookup. (:pr:`1116`)

- **Refined RSL Parameterisation**: Explicit ``R = beta * hd / elm`` parameterisation for c2m/c2h with improved numerical stability. (:pr:`1232`)

- **Seasonal Albedo Adjustment**: Added seasonal adjustment of surface albedo (``alb_id``) for vegetated surfaces based on phenology state. (:pr:`1211`)

- **Auto-initialise Vegetation Albedo**: Vegetation albedo now auto-initialises from phenology state. (:pr:`1133`)

- **Discourse-to-GitHub Bridge**: Bridge Discourse forum topics to GitHub issues with webhook sync. (:pr:`1138`)

**DTS Enhancements:**

- Added ``chunk_day`` parameter for long DTS simulations. (:pr:`1172`)
- Added ``run_dts_multi`` for multi-grid DTS simulation support. (:pr:`1173`)
- Hardened parallel multi-grid DTS execution and unified return shape. (:pr:`1176`)
- Fixed Pydantic model serialisation across multiprocessing spawn boundaries. (:pr:`1197`)
- Corrected DTS availability check and removed unsupported parameter. (:pr:`1187`)

**STEBBS Enhancements:**

- Added varied heating/cooling schedule approaches with ``setpointmethod`` model option supporting constant, dependent, and scheduled setpoint profiles. (:pr:`1261`)
- Added electrical lighting energy calculation and optional lighting control driven by daylighting. (:pr:`1254`)
- Added dynamic cold water temperature calculation. (:pr:`1249`)
- Updated ``InitialIndoorTemperature`` with monthly mean air temperature from CRU dataset. (:pr:`1241`)
- Replaced ``DeepSoilTemperature`` with ``AnnualMeanAirTemperature`` across the codebase. (:pr:`1240`)
- Fixed double-counted heating efficiency and unused setpoint temperature. (:pr:`1221`)
- Improved activity profiles replacing ``OccupantsProfile`` with ``MetabolismProfile``. (:pr:`1194`)
- Added ``same_emissivity_wall`` and ``same_emissivity_roof`` model options for emissivity validation. (:pr:`1253`)
- Added ``same_albedo_wall`` and ``same_albedo_roof`` model options for albedo validation. (:pr:`1123`)
- Removed ``MinimumVolumeOfDHWinUse`` and ``MaximumVolumeOfDHWinUse`` parameters. (:pr:`1242`)
- Fixed STEBBS 10-minute profile indexing to use full-day slot (0-143). (:pr:`1254`)
- Cleaned up STEBBS outputs. (:pr:`1175`)
- Improved STEBBS parameter descriptions. (:pr:`1257`)
- Added STEBBS parameter range defaults via Pydantic Field. (:pr:`1233`)
- Fixed default values for ``WallOuterCapFrac`` and ``RoofOuterCapFrac`` when ``rcmethod==0``. (:pr:`1224`)
- Fixed STEBBS WWR extreme cases (``WWR = 0`` or ``WWR = 1``). (:pr:`1261`)

**Validation Improvements:**

- Added draft rules registry for structured validator rule management. (:pr:`1246`)
- Added checks for ``DaylightControl``. (:pr:`1270`)
- Added rule for forcing height versus max and mean building heights. (:pr:`1266`)
- Added guard for ``stebbs_Height`` in SPARTACUS building height validation. (:pr:`1262`)
- Added conditional validation via ``_is_physics_explicitly_configured`` using Pydantic v2 ``model_fields_set``. (:pr:`1247`)
- Added STEBBS WWR-related validation rules. (:pr:`1244`)
- Added ``validate_model_option_stebbsmethod`` when STEBBS is enabled. (:pr:`1243`)
- Added STEBBS parameter range validation rules. (:pr:`1233`)
- Added ``RCMethod`` manual and related validation rules. (:pr:`1224`)
- Added SPARTACUS vegetation consistency check (``dectreeh``/``evetreeh`` vs ``veg_scale``/``veg_frac``). (:pr:`1222`)
- Added SPARTACUS surface fraction and building height conditional validation. (:pr:`1208`, :pr:`1205`)
- Added upper limit to ``nlayer`` to prevent run crashes. (:pr:`1206`)
- Improved error message for timezone and ``startdls``/``enddls``. (:pr:`1174`)
- Fixed optional ``qn_surfs`` and ``dqndt_surf`` but required in DyOHM settings. (:pr:`1189`)
- Fixed biogenic parameters not required if carbon is switched off. (:pr:`1188`)
- Refactored error message in ``validate_albedo_ranges``. (:pr:`1193`)

**Bug Fixes:**

- Fixed interpolation bounds error in RSL profiles. (:pr:`1228`)
- Fixed division-by-zero pitfalls in RSL/resistance chain. (:pr:`1229`)
- Guarded SPARTACUS LW solver against NaN from matrix singularity. (:pr:`1212`)
- Fixed SUEWS output packing overflow with fail-fast behaviour. (:pr:`1198`)
- Fixed Pydantic dict format handling in YAML numeric parser. (:pr:`1236`)
- Validated Rust output layout against Fortran metadata. (:pr:`1226`)
- Pinned pydantic>=2.12 to prevent OSGeo4W version conflict. (:pr:`1213`)
- Auto-repair stale refs in fetch_origin conductor. (:pr:`1239`)
- Deduplicated Discourse-to-GitHub issue pipeline. (:pr:`1153`)
- Fixed Sphinx and docs dependencies for Sphinx 8 compatibility. (:pr:`1159`)

**Build System and CI:**

- Hardened CI and dependency supply chain after LiteLLM incident with startup hook auditing. (:pr:`1264`)
- Added Rust change detection and Cargo build caching across all platforms. (:pr:`1217`, :pr:`1219`)
- Gated tag-triggered deployments on master ancestry. (:pr:`1162`)
- Pre-built documentation on CI, served from ``rtd`` branch. (:pr:`1167`)
- Deprecated ``env.yml`` and conda/mamba build pathway. (:pr:`1163`)
- UMEP build filter for compiled extension ABI changes. (:pr:`1164`)
- Granular path filters and pyproject classification. (:pr:`1161`)
- Added GitHub workflow skills and pre-commit quality gate. (:pr:`1160`)
- Cleaned up Sphinx deps for Sphinx 8 compatibility. (:pr:`1157`)

**Other Improvements:**

- Added ``SUEWSOutput`` index property. (:pr:`1178`)
- Added status tags for changelog entries (governance). (:pr:`1181`)
- Removed internal-only parameters from ``sample_config.yml``. (:pr:`1216`)
- Added interaction limits and contribution policy. (:pr:`1251`)

**Documentation:**

- Revised README as science-first landing page. (:pr:`1265`)
- Improved project branding with logo and favicon. (:pr:`1260`)
- Added anthropogenic emission defaults and parameter guidance. (:pr:`1231`)
- Linked community forum URLs to invite page. (:pr:`1201`)

**Breaking Changes:**

- f90wrap is no longer supported; the Rust FFI bridge is the sole simulation backend. (:pr:`1209`)
- Removed STEBBS parameters ``MinimumVolumeOfDHWinUse``, ``MaximumVolumeOfDHWinUse``, and ``DeepSoilTemperature``. (:pr:`1242`, :pr:`1240`)
- Deprecated ``env.yml`` and conda/mamba build pathway. (:pr:`1163`)
- Replaced ``OccupantsProfile`` with ``MetabolismProfile`` in STEBBS. (:pr:`1194`)

For complete details, see the `CHANGELOG <https://github.com/UMEP-dev/SUEWS/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md>`_.
