
.. _new_latest:

.. _new_2026.1.27:

Version 2026.1.27 (released on 27 January 2026)
------------------------------------------------

This release introduces significant STEBBS enhancements, physics improvements for dyOHM calculations, and extensive stability fixes for QGIS/UMEP integration.

**Major Features:**

- **STEBBS Time-Varying Profiles**: Added support for 10-minute profiles for Heating setpoints, Cooling setpoints, Appliance usage, Occupants, and Hot Water demand. This enables more realistic diurnal variation in building energy simulations. (#1038)

- **Dynamic OHM Surface Separation**: Separated surfaces for dyOHM (dynamic Objective Hysteresis Model) calculation, allowing more accurate surface heat storage modelling for different land cover types. (#1122)

- **DTS Interface**: New Direct Type System interface for Pydantic-to-Fortran execution, enabling cleaner integration between Python configuration and Fortran physics core. (#1050)

- **Build Speed Improvement**: Split ``make dev`` and ``make dev-dts`` targets for faster development builds when DTS components are unchanged. (#1108)

**Stability Improvements:**

- **Thread-Safe Error Logging**: Added modState parameter for thread-safe error handling, preventing race conditions in parallel simulations. (#1083)

- **QGIS Crash Fix**: Removed stdout writes that caused QGIS to crash when running SUEWS through the UMEP plugin. (#1086)

- **Pandas 3.0 Compatibility**: Fixed Copy-on-Write and ``asfreq()`` changes for forward compatibility with Pandas 3.0. (#1106)

- **QGIS/UMEP Test Suite**: Added comprehensive compatibility test suite to catch integration issues early. (#905)

**Physics Fixes:**

- **Biogenic CO2**: Fixed biogenic CO2 calculations to use local climate instead of global average temperature, improving FcRespi accuracy in regional studies. (#1117)

- **NumCapita Initialisation**: Fixed uninitialised NumCapita variable that caused NaN values in CO2 flux calculations. (#1053)

- **Error Flag Reset**: Reset error flag before kernel calls to prevent stale errors from previous runs affecting subsequent simulations. (#1109)

**Validation Enhancements:**

- Improved albedo ranges for physics-aware validation (#978)
- Improved emissivity ranges for physics-aware validation (#979)
- Added warning when surface fractions are auto-normalised (#1071)
- Structured error handling with detailed validation reports (#1070)

**Build System:**

- Vendored f90wrap runtime to eliminate pip dependency conflicts (#963)
- Fixed UMEP NumPy ABI compatibility for QGIS environments (#1056)
- Added merge queue support to CI workflow (#954)

**Breaking Changes:**

None. This release maintains full backward compatibility with 2025.11.20.

For complete details, see the `CHANGELOG <https://github.com/UMEP-dev/SUEWS/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md>`_.

