
.. _new_latest:

.. _new_2025.10.15:

Version 2025.10.15 (released on 15 October 2025)
----------------------------------------------------

This release introduces a modern YAML-based configuration system with comprehensive validation, marking a significant infrastructure upgrade for SUEWS.

**Major Features:**

- **YAML Configuration System**: Modern, human-readable configuration format with 697 documented parameters. See the :ref:`YAML configuration guide <yaml_input>` for migration from legacy table-based inputs.

- **Schema Versioning**: Independent schema versions (1.0, 1.1, etc.) separate from model versions for cleaner configuration evolution. Use ``suews-schema info`` to check your configuration version.

- **Three-Phase Validation Framework**:

  - Structure validation: YAML syntax and schema compliance
  - Physics validation: Scientific parameter constraints with CRU TS4.06 climatological data
  - Model validation: SPARTACUS multi-layer configurations, STEBBS constraints

  See :ref:`validation documentation <validation>` for details.

- **JSON Schema Support**: IDE integration enabling autocomplete and inline validation in VS Code, PyCharm, Vim and other editors.

- **CLI Tools**:

  - ``suews-schema``: Schema management (info, validate, migrate, export)
  - ``suews-convert``: Legacy table-to-YAML conversion
  - ``suews-validate``: Configuration validation

  Run with ``--help`` for usage information.

- **Build System Improvements**: Automatic UMEP/QGIS compatible builds (rc1 variants) with NumPy 1.x for QGIS 3.40 LTR compatibility.

- **Cross-Platform Enhancements**: Python 3.13 support, Linux manylinux2014 compatibility, Windows Unicode fixes.

Recent developments can be found in the :ref:`development version history <dev>`.

